I'm sitting in room 216 of what is now the History Building, getting ready to chat with Dr. Betty Utterberger about her experiences here.
Now, Betty, would you say a sentence or so, and so we can test and see if your mic's working?
Yes.
Well, this is going to be fun, I think, to talk about the past, which I don't talk about very often.
Betty, for the benefit of a person who might read the transcript or listen to this tape at some future time and not know about your background, give us a biographical summary before you came to A&M.
Tell us about your growing up and where you studied and served before here.
I was born in Glasgow, Scotland and came over here actually as a baby with my parents and grew up in Pennsylvania, then left the state and went to Syracuse University.
for my BA degree, where I majored in history and political science with a minor in speech.
You could do that in those days.
And then I went on to Harvard for my master's degree, and then to Duke University for my PhD.
My experience as a graduate student in history were sometimes rather difficult because I found that it was not a field that was too hospitable to women.
And so very often I found that I was the only woman in most of my graduate classes, and I think the only woman who was up for a PhD in American Diplomatic History at Duke University.
So my early academic career was one where I felt very much alone and where I was told very pointedly that history and the teaching of history was not for women.
And in fact, I remember so vividly when I went down to Duke that the head of the department, I had come down on a fellowship, so I thought maybe they might want me.
But indeed, I went into the head of the department and for two and a half hours, that wonderful old man told me that history was no place for a woman.
that I was taking the bread out of the mouths of deserving men and that what in the world did I want to do it for anyway?
I'd only go off, get married, have children, and that would be the end of all the money that was being spent on me.
So I remember vividly that
I walked out into the sunlight and I was bound and determined I wasn't going to cry, Haskell.
Not there, but I was so impressed with his office because there were books all over the desk and books from floor to ceiling and I thought, oh, this is paradise.
And then when I walked outdoors, I just felt so crushed.
I thought, what am I going to do?
And I blinked hard to keep the tears from coming.
And I said, I'm going to stay, and I'm going to show them, but I'm not going to open my mouth in class.
And I didn't for six months.
I went to all my classes.
I sat as invisibly as possible, and I didn't open my mouth.
And then, of course, I had the very good fortune of studying with Charles Sidner at the time.
Charles Sidner was probably one of the greats in Southern history.
In fact, I was sorely tempted to go into Southern history because I was so impressed by him and by his scholarship.
And so when I had to do a seminar paper for him, he said that he wanted it to be from primary sources, and if possible, from manuscript sources.
So I went to the Manuscripts Division of the Duke Library,
And I looked around at the papers and the holdings that they had.
And I saw the name of a man named Braidwood, John Braidwood.
Now, John Braidwood was a Scot.
And I had heard my father speak about John Braidwood because my father was trained in music.
In fact, he had come over to this country to study at the Washington Conservatory of Music.
And so he was very interested in voice and speaking and enunciation, particularly.
And so he had told me about how John Braidwood had tried to teach deaf people how to speak.
And so I saw this name and I thought, I wonder if this could be in any way associated with the Braidwood that I knew.
And I found there was a whole collection of these wonderful papers
from the colonial period of John Braidwood.
So that settled it.
I was going to write a paper and I did.
I wrote that first paper on John Braidwood and the first efforts to establish a school for the deaf and dumb in the United States.
I finished the paper and
Professor Sidner had every student come into his office to talk to them about the paper.
So my turn came, and I went in with fear and trembling.
And Dr. Sidner said,
Well, I see you know how to write the English language.
And I looked at him and I said, well, I hope so.
I do have a master's degree from Harvard.
And he said, well, he said, this is a fine paper.
And he says, I know that you're a struggling student.
Why don't you send it off to the Reader's Digest?
He said, you can make $500 on it.
And I drew myself up to my full height.
And I said, I'm not a journalist.
I'm a historian.
And so he said, oh.
He said, well, in that case, he said, send the paper off to Professor Binkley, who is the editor of the Journal of Southern History, and you tell him that I told you to send it.
So, I grabbed that paper out of his hands, I rushed upstairs, went to the library, searched every possible place where I could add something to make the paper better, and wrote the letter to Binkley.
And within two weeks I got a response and he said, your article will appear in the next issue of the Journal of Southern History.
Well, that did it.
That was when I found out that even though they might not listen to me in class or notice that I was there, that they didn't notice you if you did good research and writing.
And so I concentrated my attention and my effort on that.
So that's anyway the background of my graduate school experience.
And of course, the same thing happened as I tried to get a position in academe.
I found that women were just not acceptable.
Although in the South, you had a better chance because women would work for less.
And so I can remember this vividly.
My husband had been in World War II, and he had been very badly injured.
Actually, he was blown up in a jeep in a land mine in the Philippines.
And so he'd been in a camp for, in a hospital for shell-shocked and brain-damaged veterans.
And I had taken a home out there so I could be with him all the time that he was in the hospital.
And they had told him that he would never be able to go on to graduate school again.
And so I,
I...
We had to decide what we were going to do.
And I said, let's not give up.
You've always wanted to go on and get a PhD.
And all we can do is find out that it's not possible.
And doctors are very frequently wrong.
And so let's try.
We have nothing to lose and everything to gain.
And so the reason I went to Duke was because I got the most money and because
I had a very dear friend at Harvard.
He was the dean of the Harvard Graduate School, Howard Mumford Jones, and he had taken a very great interest in me and my work.
In fact, he had given me away when I was married, and he was the one who had persuaded me to marry Robert.
I was never going to marry, but he was the one who actually had persuaded me to marry Robert.
And so I went to talk to him about what to do in this situation that we found ourselves in.
He said, you go ahead, follow your heart.
If you think you can do it and Bob can do it.
He said, but don't stay here.
This weather is too cold.
Just find a place where it's more temperate.
The pace is perhaps a little easier and so on.
So I did.
And that's why we went to Duke.
And Bob was, of course, on veterans' benefits, so we went.
It was a rough, rough year, I will tell you.
But he persevered, and somehow his brain cells began to take over where the memory cells had been damaged, and gradually he was able to
do the work, not only do his work, but he had a fellowship the second year.
In any case, it was, but we didn't have any money.
So I petitioned after two years at Duke to take my prelims early so I could get out and teach, and I was allowed to do that.
So the first job I had, the first job offer I had,
was from Wake Forest.
And I still remember the letter from the head of the Department of History.
And it was in handwriting, just cramped little handwriting.
And he offered me the position of teaching history in the Department of History at Wake Forest, saying that I would teach five different courses in history.
and that they would pay me $2,200, and that I would have the honor of being the first woman appointed at Wake Forest.
Now, as far as you know, this was the entire faculty?
No, I think it was just history.
I think it was just history.
And so, well, I was thrilled, of course, to even have an offer.
But I just didn't know how we were going to make it on that small sum of money.
And so then I continued to try for another position, and the department told me that there was an opening at what is now East Carolina University.
And so I went and interviewed at East Carolina.
And they offered me a position in the History Department, also with the honor of being the first woman in the Department of History.
But they offered me $3,200, $1,000 more.
So I knew that Wake Forest was more prestigious.
But I thought, right now it's not prestige, but money.
So I accepted the appointment at East Carolina.
And I taught there for two years.
And I found out how difficult it was to really be alone.
That was no collegiality, just doing your work.
And that was it.
Then after that, my husband and I, and of course every summer and every evening from 6 o'clock at night until midnight, I worked on a dissertation because I knew that if I couldn't finish that dissertation at that time, if I had to leave the area, that it would not get finished.
I had been warned about that.
And every summer, I went to Washington, DC, and I worked in the National Archives and the Library of Congress, Manuscripts Division, et cetera.
And I was able to complete my degree.
And Bob and I both got our PhDs at Duke in 1950.
And what was your dissertation topic?
My dissertation was on the origins of American intervention in Russia in 1918 to 1920.
It was a topic that was, well, I was very fortunate because I was the first person to get access to the newly declassified records in the National Archives on the United States and the Russian Revolution.
So I had this marvelous opportunity, and there's so many stories I could tell you about that, but I won't go into it.
But in any case, then we went out to California.
Bob had a position with the research laboratories of Standard Oil of California.
And so we went off there, and then I tried to get a job.
out there, and I wrote 50 letters at least to every institution in the whole area, and there was no affirmative action at that time.
And so I would get back these letters that said, we do not hire women.
That was it.
And I was just distraught.
I could not understand how it would be possible for me ever to get a job, because I wasn't about to have a sex change.
And I didn't know what I could do.
You can change a lot of things, but there's one thing you can't do, for the most part, is to change your gender.
And so I was really very desperate.
But at every opportunity, I would walk, go around, and visit the department.
colleges and try to interview and see if there wasn't some possibility of getting an appointment.
Well, as it turned out, I finally was able to get an appointment at Whittier College.
And initially, it was not because of my history background, but it was because I had such a fine liberal arts education.
And so the Ford Foundation had given Whittier College a grant to establish a liberal arts center.
And this was supposed to encompass all of the liberal arts and provide opportunities for actually adults to go on and do graduate work.
It was at a time
when there was much concern about engineers and technicians being so narrow in their viewpoint that they didn't have the background to really engage in some of the very broad international events that were taking place and dealings and so on.
So this was one of the things that the Ford Foundation at that time was doing, was really promoting liberal arts.
And so they were looking for someone to be the director.
And they were cooperating with the president of Whittier College in the selection.
And so I applied and I got the position.
And there were test centers for liberal arts all over the country.
UCLA had one, University of Virginia, University of Michigan.
Whittier College was, I think, one of the two small private liberal arts colleges that had it.
Well, it was a wonderful experience, and I had great opportunities to design programs in the liberal arts.
And as it turned out, the center at Whittier College became the very best center in the whole country.
And so I had received a lot of approbation for that.
But at the same time, I should tell you that my dissertation had won the prize at Duke University for the best dissertation in any field for the last three years.
And so that meant that they were going to publish my dissertation.
And so I, of course, was very, very busy revising the dissertation, doing new research, et cetera, so I could get it out.
Then in 1956, the dissertation came out.
It was published.
Again, it won the prize of the American Historical Association for the best dissertation by a younger scholar in any field.
Well, I think that really helped tremendously.
So then, when jobs began to open up around and I could apply, I had a very nice vitae.
because by that time I had also published a number of articles as well as the book, and so I was fortunate in getting an appointment at California State University at Fullerton, and again as the first woman in the history department.
So again, I had this wonderful opportunity to teach everything.
I mean, all this time, I want you to know that I taught everything.
I taught Renaissance and Reformation.
I taught modern Europe.
I taught Latin American history.
I taught Asian civilizations.
I taught Russian history.
At Whittier College, I think I may well have been the very first person
to teach a course in Russian-American relations because it was the beginning of the Cold War.
And I was really concerned about the lack of knowledge about US-Russian relations, et cetera.
So I designed this course.
And it was very well attended.
And of course, I got into all kinds of trouble because people thought I was a liberal, pinko, red.
because I was teaching this course and also because I let my students talk about very delicate subjects like should China be admitted to the United Nations, etc.
And I did have a very unhappy experience because one of the members of the Board of Trustees
at Whittier College thought I ought to be fired because I was putting all of these misguided ideas into the heads of my students, which I wasn't at all.
But in any case, this was the McCarthy period.
And I was in Los Angeles County.
And it was just one of the strongholds of McCarthyism.
And so this was a very sad experience.
But I have to tell you a story that I think is so important.
I think for the historical record, it's important.
And that is that when the president called me in and he said that I was being very strongly criticized because of what I was teaching.
This is Whittier.
This is at Whittier College.
And Whittier College is a very fine liberal arts institution.
In fact, it was a school that Richard Nixon had gone to.
And I had heard Richard Nixon give a commencement speech, and I thought it was a very fine commencement speech at the time.
I mean, he even talked about Southeast Asia, and he talked about it in a way that seemed that he understood what was going on there, etc.
But in any case, I asked if I could at least talk with the person who was so strongly opposed to me.
And so the president arranged for me to meet, I'll tell you his name.
It was William E. Hughes.
And so he... H-U-G-H-E-S.
H-U-G-H-E-S.
And I learned a great deal from Mr. Hughes.
And he was an elderly gentleman.
One of the things I learned from Mr. Hughes was that you're never too old to learn.
That there's always hope for you.
And so keep on trying.
Well, anyway, Mr. Hughes took me out to the country club.
And...
We had lunch together, and I, young, starry-eyed, idealistic as I was, believing so deeply in the democratic process, and having been educated by some of the truly great historians of our time, including Arthur Schlesinger Sr.
and Howard Mumford Jones, and just really great, great scholars.
And so I had certainly learned well.
And I was convinced of the importance of always providing opportunities for students to learn how to think for themselves, to discover how to think, how to use their heads, etc., and to provide them with a body of knowledge that was worthy of their understanding.
And so I tried to tell Mr. Hughes what education was all about, and particularly education in a free society.
And he listened and he asked questions.
And I told him, you know, in the Soviet Union, I could never teach like this.
They don't ever allow their students to study a variety of interpretations and viewpoints and opposing documentary materials, et cetera, because they already think they have the truth.
But I said, in our society, we trust our students.
We respect their capacity to be able to use their heads, et cetera.
And so we need to provide them with the opportunity to exercise those intellectual faculties.
And so I went on giving him the usual kind of a strong statement about education in a free society.
And he listened, and he asked questions, and I responded.
And then we went to lunch a second time, and the second time we talked again.
And that was the end of that.
He never pushed any charges against me.
The next semester, Mr. Hughes enrolled in one of my courses.
And he sat through the course and he loved what was happening to the students.
He saw the intellectual ferment that existed in the classroom and the way in which I really sought to cultivate that.
And at the end of the semester, he came to me and he said, I like what you're doing.
And he said, how can we expand this?
And he said, I was wondering, what do you think about this, he said.
And he told me that he had this idea of having a university on a ship.
And the ship would travel all over the world, and students would come in.
from all over the world, and they would enroll together, and they would get to know each other, and they would sit in classrooms together, and as the ship went into each port, there would be opportunities for students to get out off the ship and to visit in the areas of their own discipline,
and to have professors from universities in those ports come on the ship and talk to them, et cetera.
Well, the whole idea was just wonderful, I thought.
So he said, what do you think about that?
I said, well, I thought it was a great idea.
He said, would you help me to start it?
I said, yes.
So I became the executive secretary of the University of the Seven Seas.
And so we planned a curriculum, we got professors appointed from all over Southern California, and we had to get a ship.
And at that time,
And so Israel offered us a ship.
We had the opportunity to get a ship from Israel.
But the problem was at that time, there was this terrible conflict going on with Israel and the Arab states, and they had closed the Suez Canal to all Israeli shipping.
So we couldn't take the ship because we couldn't go through the Suez Canal.
And then the Netherlands offered us a ship.
It was a Rotterdam.
And so the Rotterdam became our first ship.
And our first students went off on the Rotterdam.
And that was the beginning of the University of the Seven Seas.
We got it accredited by the Western Association for Accreditation.
And that started the University of the Seven Seas.
It has been going ever since.
Chapman College, a private Baptist college, carried it on.
And then the University of Pittsburgh began a program
The one out of Chapman College was called Campus Afloat, and the one at University of Pittsburgh is of course still going, but that program started well.
You can imagine what a wonderful thing it was that out of all of this turmoil in the McCarthy period that great good had come.
at least as far as my own personal experience was because I saw that it was possible to really change people's minds through education and since that time I have met
tens of thousands of students who have been on that program.
And I have seen what a tremendous difference it has made in their outlook.
So that was that.
Then I went on, but then I had a terrible bout with cancer.
I was able to survive, but when I came back to Whittier College, after a number of major surgeries, I felt like people were just expecting me to die at any minute.
And I didn't want to be in that state.
And so I wanted to get out of there.
I just wanted to put that all behind me and go somewhere where people didn't know what I had just gone through.
And so I began to look elsewhere.
And that's when I had the chance to get the appointment at California State University.
And I went there.
And I started over again.
Fullerton, at that point, was
It was?
It was Orange State College.
And it was small and the area was not that.
Yeah, oh, I will tell you.
At that point, there were orange groves from Fullerton to Whittier.
It was just wide open, and it was just beautiful.
The air was filled with the smell of orange blossoms, and it was just, I mean, there were barracks for the college.
They only had a few buildings, and it was a great pioneering opportunity.
Well, I like pioneering opportunities.
So I really worked to build that program.
And the head of the department, Giles T. Brown, was a very wonderful man who was very supportive of me, I must say.
And so I taught all kinds of courses there.
And I had some very fine students.
I didn't even know what tenure was at the time because I'd never had to go through that process.
I didn't know anything about it.
And so when I was interviewed and they asked me what my rank was, I didn't know what my rank was.
And so I wrote back to the dean at Whittier College and I said,
What's my rank?
Do I have a rank?
And so the dean wrote back and he said, yes.
He said, you're an associate professor.
So I told him that I was an associate professor, first time I knew about it.
Because you see, you can't imagine how limited my view was about the history profession.
They had a professional association in Southern California.
It was called the History Guild.
There were no women admitted.
And this, I think, is important for the record in women's history, you know?
There were no women admitted to the History Guild.
And we had a visiting professor.
from Ohio State.
His name was Lowell Ragatz.
And he was in African history.
And Lowell and I became great friends.
He liked the work that I had done on America's Siberian expedition.
And, in fact, he encouraged me to put it in for some big prize of the American Historical Association.
But I said, oh, no, no, no, that wouldn't work.
I wouldn't do that.
But in any case, he, of course, was invited to go to the History Guild.
So he said, well, Betty, why don't you come along?
I said, what's the History Guild?
And so then he explained to me what it was, and I said, oh, I think that would be wonderful.
I'd meet some of my colleagues in history.
I planned on going, and I was very excited about the opportunity.
And then Lowell told the president.
The president was a historian, Paul Smith.
And he was a constitutional historian.
And he said, oh, it's very bad.
He said, you know, she's.